All right.
So let's do a couple of exercises for intervals of concavity and inflection points.
So it says find the intervals of concavity and inflection points if any for a vaccine cause X to the
fourth minus 8 x cubed.
So I'll let you do your thing.
Go ahead and pause the video and give it a shot.
All right so let's go ahead and do it together.
So remember we're finding intervals of concavity and inflection points.
So this is just like finding relative extrema and increasing and decreasing intervals.
We're just going to use the second derivative instead of the first.
So the first step is to go ahead and find the second derivative to find the second derivative.
When he defined the first derivative.
So let's go out and find the first one so derivative of x to the fourth or bring down or dictator that's
for X that's powerful leaders going to be at three minus then constant multiple is eight times bring
down a dictator which is a three X and less powerful leader is 2.
So let's go ahead and simplify that's for X to the third minus eight times threes 24 x squared.
All right.
So that is our first derivative.
Now we need to go to our second derivative.
And by the way if you got confused as to whether we use here the first or the second derivative remember
that we have our mnemonic fir and Seck.
So F I R N S E C in this case we have S E C which means Second
remember that e is inflection point so it's spelled wrong on purpose.
Rhymes with reflection.
Reflection has an e.
So inflection also has an E for those mnemonic.
And then we have concavity.
All right.
So we use a second derivative to find inflection points and concavity which is exactly what we're finding
over here.
All right.
So let's go ahead and get this second derivative.
A derivative of 4 x cubed.
We have a constant multiple which is four.
We bring down a dictator 3 x a less powerful leader is to minus constant multiple again and we have
a 24 so we put it on the side bring down a dictator which is a two and x to the one and let's go ahead
and simplify this so we can get our second derivative.
So 4 times 3 is 12 x squared
minus 24 times 2 is 48 x.
All right.
So here we have our second derivative 12 x squared minus 48 x.
The second thing we're going to do is we're going to find basically the critical points.
But for the second derivative instead of the first remember here we always work with the second derivative
and again to find critical points you need to find the numbers that make the second derivative either
equal to zero or undefined.
In this case the second derivative cannot be undefined because there cannot be any division by zero.
Therefore we just find the numbers that make it equal to zero.
So we set it equal to zero.
12 x squared minus 48 x.
So a second derivative equal to zero.
So a little tip for you whenever you have two axes you probably need to factor.
That's the typical way.
If you only have 1 x you can just solve for X right.
You move everything else to the other side and you get X when you have to act just like this.
Typically again you need to factor sometimes you need to factor when you have one X but it all depends
on the type of problem that you get.
So that's why you have to do a lot of these to make sure that you cover all the cases and you're not
surprised in the middle of a test.
All right so what can we do here.
Well we don't have any difference of squares.
We don't have any trinomial to factor whatever we try to factor as regularly.
Meaning let's take out common terms that 12 x squared and 48 x have.
So let's see they have 12 as a factor because this can be divided by 12 and 48 can be divided by 12
as well.
So we take out the 12 and one more thing they have in common is x.
This one has x squared.
And this one has just X..
So the lowest common factor is X..
All right we cannot take for example x squared outside because this one doesn't have X squared but X
itself is contained in both here once and here twice.
So we take our 12 X and if we take our 12 x from this one all we have left is X right.
Mine is if we take out 12 x from this one.
So we take away the X and we divide by 12.
We only have four.
Here we go.
Now is so interesting.
Now we have this multiplication 12 x times X minus 4.
And remember that when any of these zero of either.
This one is zero.
Or this one is zero.
Then the whole thing is true.
So our critical numbers are going to be whenever this is zero.
And whenever there's a zero.
So for the first one here one is 12 x equals zero.
What does X need to be.
Obviously the only answer is zero.
Twelve times 0 gives you zero.
There's no other number so that when you multiplied by 12 gives you zero.
All right.
So our first critical number is going to be zero.
And what else.
Let's find out the other one.
One is X minus 4 equal to zero.
Well it's very easy to see but let's do it anyways x minus 4 0.
So we had four on both sides.
Right.
We're bring down the x negative four plus four cancels out and zero plus four equals four.
All right so when X equals 4 right here then this is zero.
And that makes sense because for at minus four equals zero.
Right.
So are two critical numbers are 0 and 4.
All right.
These are the critical numbers for the second derivative.
Then we go to our third step which is basically testing values and classifying left and right
so we draw our number line.
Remember it goes from lowest to highest.
As you go from left to right.
So we have zero which is the first one and then four which is the second one.
These are critical numbers.
So we have to test to the left of zero.
We have to test between 0 and 4 and we have to test to the right of 4 so to the left of 0 Let's pick
negative 1 easy number between 0 and 4.
Let's pick one which again is an easy number and a greater than four so to the right of four we'll pick
10 which is also an easy number.
And remember we're plugging these in into the second derivative because we're testing to see the sign
of the second derivative which tells you about the concavity.
So plugging in negative 1 into the second derivative.
So we can either plug it in here or we can plug it into the factor form.
I think in this case we can just plug it in into this one here might be easier.
All right so let's plug it in right here.
We have 12 negative 1 squared.
Mine is 48 times negative 1 so negative 1 squared is 1 because negative times a negative equals a positive
times 12 is just 12 and then minus 48 times negative 1 some negative times a negative becomes a positive
positive 48 and 12 plus 48 is 60.
So we have that to the left of the zero.
We have a positive second derivative.
Let's go to our second test value of 1.
This one here between zero and four.
So we have 12 times 1 squared.
Minus 48 times 1 so we have one squared is one times 12 is 12 minus 48 times on it's a negative times
a positive is a negative.
So if you have $12 and you spend 48 you're 36 in the negative right in the red.
All right.
So this number is negative.
That means that whatever this one is the second derivative is negative.
In other words from 0 to 4 the second derivative for this function f of x is negative.
And let's go ahead and test our last value our last value is 10 and it's to the right or for.
So we plug in San So we have 12 times 10 squared.
Mine is 48 times 10.
So we have 10 squared is a hundred times 12 is 1200.
And then we have minus 48 times 10 negative times a positive as a negative and 48 times 10 is for 80.
And this is equal to 720
right.
So we get a positive number for this 10.
That means that to the right of this for we have a positive second derivative.
So check it out.
Second derivative is positive up until 0 then from 0 to 4.
It becomes negative.
And then after 4 it becomes positive again.
So that means what.
So that means that to the laptop zero the function is concave up because remember positive second derivative
concave up then between 0 and four it's concave down because it's negative and from for on it's concave
up again because it's positive.
Not only that but it looks like we have two inflection points one 0 and 1 and 4 and we know that because
remember an inflection point is where the concavity changes.
So it's zero.
It goes from concave up.
And when you get to zero concave down.
So concavity changed right here.
Not only that but at four it was concave down.
And when you get to 4 it becomes concave up.
All right so let's summarize all of this here.
We have that from negative infinity to zero.
So basically to the left of 0 and up to zero we have concave up.
And then what happens from 0 4 it becomes concave down because the sign of the second derivative is
negative.
So from 0 to 4 this is concave down.
And then finally we have this for right here.
So from for on so for numbers greater than four it is concave up again because the sign is positive.
So from for up to positive infinity it is concave up.
All right.
So this is the first part of her answer.
These are the intervals of concavity.
The last thing that we need to do is remember who wants inflection points which is no where they happen
at X equals zero.
And it actually calls for but to get the actual points we need to find out what the y values for these
points are to do that.
Remember that we plug it into the original because we want the actual y value of the actual inflection
points.
We're now using the first derivative because we're not even touching it here.
And the second derivative.
Again if you plug them in they're going to give you a zero which in and of itself it's not like you
couldn't have an inflection points with a y of 0.
But that's not what we're doing.
Remember second derivative measures concavity.
What we're trying to find is just a Y value of a point.
So let's go ahead and plug 0 and 4 into the original.
So I'll do it right here.
So let me separate this f of 0 in the original is 0 to the four.
Mine is 8 0 to 3 right.
We're just plugging it in right here.
Surprisingly that gives 0 to the 4 0 mine is 0 2 3 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 0.
All right.
That is the first one.
And for the second one we're plug in and for so we have four to the four.
Mine is 8 times 4 to the three.
If you plug that into a calculator that will give you 256.
That's four to the fourth minus 512 which is for the third time.
Eights
which gives you negative to 56.
I'm running out of space here but hopefully you can see it.
That means that our inflection points are located here.
First one is that 0 0 right x value of zero y value of 0.
So inflection points at 0 0 and the second one is located at four which is the x value negative 256
which is the y value.
So hard for Khama negative to 56.
This is the second part of our answer.
Right.
Little bit tight there but we got it.
All right.
So this is it.
I know you must be looking at this and saying wow that was a big one.
It was so.
Just to quickly summarize for those of concavity and inflection points for this function.
First thing we do is we find the first derivative and then we get the second derivative.
Remember that concavity and inflection points are done with the second.
Then we find the critical numbers for this second derivative.
So numbers that make it equal to zero or undefined in this case there is no bottom so no undefined.
We just set it equal to zero.
For that we had to factor out the common terms between 12 x squared and 48 x.
And this gave us this multiplication.
So we found the numbers that made this equal to zero or this equal to zero to make the whole thing equal
to zero.
These numbers were 0 and 4.
So we draw a number line put 0 on 4.
Remember it's from lowest to highest as you go from left to right.
And then we pick values to the left of 0 between 0 and 4 and to the right of 4 we went ahead and plugged
these values.
Negative 1 1 and 10 into the second derivative and we got the sides of the answers.
It was positive negative positive so positive negative positive and based on this we know that the function
is concave up from negative infinity to zero because the sign is positive and it is also concave up
from four up to positive infinity because to the right of four is positive.
This is our third interval right here.
And finally it is concave down between 0 and 4 because a sign is negative.
Finally we wanted to get the inflection points and we know there are inflection points because concavity
changes from up to down at zero base and the signs and from down to up at four based on these signs.
So we go ahead and grab the 0 and we grab the four and we plug them into the original to get the Y values
of those inflection points.